xii· , inaccensum.

sible to his cause, Caesar gave him his daughter J ulia in marriage,
and he himself married the daughter ol L. Calpurnius Piso, who was
elected consul sor the year n. c. 57.

The province os Transalpina Gaul ufforded Caesar a brilliant op-
portunity ol displaying bis military genius, and os attaching the army
to his person; while at the sarna time hewse not too iar lrern Reme
to continue his connection with tha city, watch the proceedings ol
bis snemies, end keep his friends actively engaged in prometing his
interests3 for be must have loressan that, il the aristocracy should
ever succeed in gaiaing Pompey over to their side, they would not
scruple to use force against him. Alter the close of his consulship,
he remaiued sor some time in the city; lor although his successore .
in office were attached to his cause, the praetors wanted to rescind
his regularior„ but their . attempta were useless. Alter quitting
Rome, be lingared sor a lew months with his legions in the neigh-
bourhood os the city, with'the view ol supporting Clodius, who was
then tribune of the peopla, and hed rasolnad to bring about the down-
fall os Cicero. When the latter had withdrawu to exile, Caesar, about
the end oi April, a. c. 68, set out for Gaul. We need not here give
an account olbis campaigns in that country, for they are described by
the great general himself, in the work to which tbis sketch is intend-
ed asan introduction. Suffice it to say, that during his administra·
tion ol Gaul, from a. s. 58 to s. c. 50, be completely subdued the
country between the Rhine, the ocean, the Pyrenaea, and the Alps,
notwithstanding the repeated and formidabis attempta os the inhabi-
tants to shalre off the Roman yoke; and that this was the first grem
step towards Romanising a region in which, during the ampire, the
Latin lauguage was as commonly spoken as in Italy. The French
language, even at this day, is a living proof to what extent Roman
ervilizution at one time prevailed in Gaul. Caesar, moreover, twice
crossad the Rhine, and twice invaded Britain, but made no perma-
nent conquesta either in Germany or in our own island.

It is remathad above that Caesar received his provinces ior live
years, a period which would have terminated in a. c. 54, but in a. c.
56, while his army was in winter quarters, he hed a meeting with
Pompey and Crassus in the north of Italy, at which it was arranged
that Pompey should have the consulship lor the year rr. c. 55, and
that afterwards they should have the provinces of Spain end Syria sor
live years each. The two, in return, promised to procura sor Caesar
dra prolongation of his administration os Gaul for five years. This
was brought about by abill oi the tribune Trebonium so that ansar's
proconsulship oi Gaul was now to be continued till the end of a. c.
4⁹· The year alter these new arrangements, J ulia, the wile ot* Pom .

pay, died t aad there being no longer any houd betwm Ceasar and²

 

